If I was a young man again, would I go farming now? Without hesitation the answer would be "Yes". Am I mad? My wife says "Undoubtedly, but then you always did like a challenge." And the way things are, a challenge it certainly would be.  Being a farmer has always seemed to be the most enduring occupation one could choose. The air we breathe is all around us, although it can be pretty horrible in some places. Water basically falls out of the sky, but the third essential for life, food, has to be produced on a day-to-day basis unceasingly. You would expect agriculture, therefore, with an expanding world population, to be the safest profession to join. It may not feel like that in Britain at the moment, but I have absolutely no doubt that circumstances will change. 

 There is one aspect of society's view of food production at the present time, however, that really does worry me. Groups of well-meaning people seem to spring up every time there is any radical advance in technology, and trumpet the alarm in the most strident tones. I expect it has been happening since we learnt how to make fire without waiting for a lightening strike. No doubt, in those days, the more anxious members of the tribe got together and stamped it out before it set the world alight. But there was space then to go away quietly and try it out with nobody looking. Now, anything new is world news within hours. Of course you have gathered that I am referring to genetically-modified organisms. 

 I can well remember a similar situation arising when artificial insemination was developed in the late 1940s. One of my professors at university at that time, Dr John Hammond, was a very well-known geneticist. He lectured on animal reproduction and was, unlike some of the professors, a most amusing and accomplished speaker; his lectures were packed to the gunnels. He was one of the foremost scientists at the time involved with the separation and storage of semen, to allow the development of vast numbers of offspring being sired by one superior animal. I think I am right in saying that the Milk Marketing Board was financing some of the research. The days when a runner, generally me, was sent to the owner of the local village bull, informing him that we had a cow bulling and could he come immediately, with bull, have long gone. And what a staggering difference to livestock farming that has made. 

 One of the asides that Dr Hammond used to include in his lectures, was an update on the abusive letters he had received from members of the public on the subject of AI. Apart from the personal attacks on his moral and religious beliefs, there was real and, no doubt, very proper concern about the effect the use of such techniques would have on human reproduction. Babies without known fathers, accidental inbreeding, loss of natural human diversity, development of a master race, and so on. And all perfectly possible. The feelings expressed were almost the same as we are getting about GMOs today. Should we have stopped then and should we stop now?  I am one of those who think that it is impossible to put the genie back in the bottle. We have to go on, but make sure we know what we are doing and control properly those who are doing it. The idea that we should try to make Britain a GMO-free country is about as daft as stamping out that prehistoric fire.  

Imagining myself as a young farmer starting tomorrow, I would want the chance to develop and use the enormous potential that these new techniques could bring. In fact if we were to go down the road of a blanket ban in this country, I would emigrate immediately. No one disputes that there is a lot wrong with the way the technology is being developed at present. There cannot be any sense in allowing the patenting of life forms which gives some multinational companies a licence to print money. But the possibilities to improve life on this planet, in its present predicament, are mind-blowing. Genetic engineering within species could produce food plants that are naturally resistant to pests and diseases, fix their own nitrogen requirements, become perennial instead of annual, are salt tolerant and produce increased yields, in a timescale that could make all the difference to the future.  So my message, as a young farmer, would be don't ban it, but make absolutely sure it's done right.
